Introduction
============

In the preparation of this chapter, the author read approximately 150 peer-reviewed publications and a large number of recent conference proceedings. Two things became apparent: (1) electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS) are evolving rapidly as manufacturers innovate, and the peer-reviewed literature does not adequately reflect products
on the market. (2) Published findings of analytical testing and analysis of ENDS tend to show thermal decomposition products at either very low or very high levels, with little agreement in the middle. To address the first issue, recent conference proceedings are cited to fill gaps in the literature. The second issue is addressed only when required to highlight differences in testing methodologies. The objective is primarily to explain the results and implications of ENDS aerosol testing. Definitive advice on the choice and appropriateness of particular test methods must await further developments.

All current ENDS deliver nicotine in the form of a heated aerosol commonly comprised of propylene glycol (PG), glycerin (GLY), water, and flavoring. The modern ENDS arose from a 2003 invention by Chinese pharmacist Lik Hon,1 but the concept of delivering nicotine in a heated PG or GLY aerosol has been around since at least 1960.2 Technical challenges, including battery technology, delayed commercialization until the 21st century. ENDS are increasingly popular, with millions of users in the United States and Europe,3(cid:1)5 and are often a replacement for combustible cigarettes.6 The aerosol is called a vapor, and usage is called vaping. This is inaccurate, because “vapor” refers to a gaseous state, while the aerosol from ENDS is a complex suspension of fine particles, not pure gas phase vapor compounds. The ENDS aerosol is a complex mixture containing semiliquid particulate matter along with gas phase compounds. Unlike combustible cigarette smoke, ENDS aerosol does not contain true particulate matter. It is produced by atomization of the liquid and not through combustion of carbon-based material, as in smoking a combustible cigarette. The aerosol is typically generated by heating the liquid with a small gauge metal wire in contact with a heat-resistant material containing the liquid. Two main types of atomizers are currently used. Devices with a separate wick to transfer the liquid from a reservoir to the heating coil are called clearomizers or atomizers. Those that integrate the heating coilintotheliquid chamberare calledcartomizers. In all devices,aerosol is delivered for inhalation into the user’s respiratory tract.7 Most of the aerosol is retained by the respiratory tract, and any not retained is exhaled into the environment.8 ENDS come in a variety of shapes and sizes, from small devices that resemble a conventional combustible cigarette and are called cigalikes, to much larger devices called personal vaporizers, mods, or advanced devices. The larger devices visually have more in common with other electronic devices than with combustible cigarettes. ENDS have been commercialized in various forms and designs but all have similar physical and operational characteristics: a battery, a liquid reservoir, and an atomizer. The size of the product and amount of aerosol that can be delivered without recharging the battery are driven by the capacity of the battery. Small cigalikes can deliver the contents of a single, prefilled cartridge of around 1mL of liquid on a single charge. Larger devices can deliver the contents of 5(cid:1)40mL before recharging. Table 2.1 gives the characteristics of common ENDS, including the chronological generation of each product, which is often cited in the literature.
